So, we're trying to piece [music]
together really the situation across the
Strait of Hormuz, and we're looking at
various data sets. I'll get to this this
this vessel, this Iron Maiden vessel.
I'm sure you've probably seen the story
on the Bloomberg terminal and elsewhere
as well.
Number one is let me tell you about
Vortexa, fantastic set of numbers.
They've dropped these daily updates in
our inboxes, and I think the latest one
here coming through in terms of relative
vessel volumes through that part of the
world, right? So, whether you're talking
tankers or dry bulk, it's dried up
substantially in in recent days or so.
So, we're looking at, for example,
transits fell from a January average of
40 ships per day
to just a few on March 2. By March 3,
Vortexa data recorded only one tanker
making the trips. And that's as as of
about at the I would say the peak of it
at the start of it at the earlier in the
week. Now, what are we showing here?
Bloomberg map, right? That is Strait of
Hormuz. This is there's the Gulf. This
is where we are as forth in as far as
Iron Maiden's concerned. So, Feb 18,
about 3 weeks back, it was docked in one
of Dubai ports here, Jebel Ali. What
happened was
it then transited through, spent a
couple of days
on on on on on on different paths, of
course, within the Gulf. Got stuck
in and around that time in about Feb 20s
or so.
And then we understand we understand it
changed its signaling, and at this point
in time this was taking place, if from
an Asia perspective in terms of time,
because this was last seen UTC about an
hour back at about this time. This was
around I would say about midnight Asia
time. It's then managed to cross. This
is dry bulk, by the way. And we
understand it is headed towards the Asia
Pacific, and we understand it's not
information that's stated on on the
vessel itself. It's headed toward China.
Now, is that a route, literally and
figuratively, we can take in order to
alleviate the supply crunch we are
seeing right now.
We know of course China is friendly
to to to to players in that part of the
world and might that be actually one of
the things that makes safe passage safe
yeah given of course the
connections.
>> You mentioned the change in the signage
right when it was around that kind of
Omani coastline right?
>> we are right now currently. So it's
interesting to note before that it was
called it was labeled four orders.
Quickly once it got to there it changed
to China owner.
>> Yeah.
And then it was able to kind of safely
go through.
There's a lot of questions obviously on
what this means. I mean they're claiming
that they are a China owner here. Let's
bring in our owner here. Let's bring in
Nicholas Lua who may be kind of piece
things together for us. So so they're
claiming to be Chinese owned Nicholas.
Tell us a little more. Why would a ship
claim to be Chinese as it crosses the
strait?
Well I think it's a really useful
strategy in order to bypass a very
dangerous choke point right now Yvonne
and I think one thing to note about the
Iron Maiden and what a great name for a
ship that had the guts iron constitution
to go through Hormuz yesterday right? Uh
it's it's a it's a terrific idea and I
think to be fair to Iron Maiden it's not
completely not Chinese linked right?
It's operated at least according to the
intel we have by a Chinese operator
and I think there are some links to a
Japanese owner. So that's kind of why
the picture is a little unclear.
Uh that's it. Iron Maiden isn't unique
in that ships passing Hormuz on a normal
day do routinely switch their ownership.
You know they they switch their four
order sign to something like Chinese
owner or Russian owner and I mean you
can figure out right? It's a good
strategy for like trying to get around
some of the dangers like even on a
normal day it's worth reporting those
are dangerous waters. So, finding a way
to make yourself more protected, like
even if it's not insurance, that's
that's something. It's not nothing.
Yeah, that's a good that's a good point
you bring up because people tend to
forget that ownership can actually
change.
Uh can actually change in the same way.
I think it's just trying to piece
together the timing where it was and
when it actually took place and whether
or not it actually took place. That's a
good that's a good qualifier there. But,
the broader context here, so we're a few
days into this, Nicholas. What do we
know in terms of how badly hit the
region is in terms of the fuel shortage?
What What are we not receiving that we
would have ordered at this point in
time?
I'm not going to be cagey about it. It's
in some ways a fuel trader's worst
nightmare right now, right? Like
basically
as good as nothing is passing through
Hormuz.
We've already seen China, the
Asia-Pacific's third largest oil
exporter, cut say say that it's not
going to export anymore, right? Now, to
be fair to China, like a lot of its
production is meant for the domestic
market. It supplies
outside of China on a quota basis, so
there are some limits on what it can
supply. But, I think the rest of the
regions also really edgy, right? Like
the Japanese refiners, as we reported
yesterday, have actually approached the
government asking for strategic
stockpiles to be released to them. And I
think Japan is particularly under threat
because unlike some of the other like
merchant refiners in the region, Japan
is a very conservative country, once
upon a time safety meant buying almost
all its flows from the Arab Gulf. Guess
where's been hit? The Arab Gulf. So, I
think that's why some of the major
exporters are in trouble. I think some
of the other
refiners have a little less a little
more room to wiggle. I'll give you an
example, like South Korea, right? A lot
of its refiners are mega producers.
They're designed to take advantage of
the
need for supply here in Asia. So, they
they produce to sell, right? And they
have a relatively diversified supply
compared to Japan. If you look at Korea,
they buy from the US, they buy from the
AG. So, even if some barrels are lost
coming out of the Persian Gulf, there
are ways to get around it. And of
course, I think you might have seen the
headlines already, like the US is also
letting Indian refiners uh
have a pass on like Russian oil at least
for the time being for a month so that
uh the current like supply shock can be
tamed a little bit. I like to point you,
of course, to all prices, my bread and
butter. Those are coming down a little
bit even in a week. So, we're sort of
ending the today slightly down uh the
starting the day slightly down, but not
to forget this is still the biggest
surge since 2022, right? So, there is an
escalation. There is real concern about
supply shocks. Uh we've seen uh
producers lose some of their barrels. Uh
we've seen people start hoarding fuel in
certain markets including Singapore.
But at the same time, uh
I think Trump is aware and the global
balances are very tight and there are
ways that we're trying to uh the global
market geopolitical players are trying
to ease off some of those supply shocks.
Ni- Nicholas, I think that that's a good
point as well that, you know, China does
have options, a lot of options in terms
of being able to manage its energy mix
temporarily. And of course, I think one
of the things you mentioned, too, is
they're telling some of the refiners to
not export and just keep keep keep the
supply in. What do we know specifically
about what China is trying to do? And
how is that affecting domestic energy
prices?
I think it's clear that domestic energy
prices have come up a fair bit, I think,
because even as there is no uh even as
like a lot of the supply that's produced
is meant for the domestic market, uh
it's not immune to global supply shocks.
I will say, look closely at what China
does with its strategic petroleum
reserves, right? The SPR. We spent a
whole like a good chunk of the second
half of last year talking about how
China's been stockpiling barrels. It's
been trying to build its crude supplies
in order to bolster its energy security,
right? And let's not forget that that
came last year in the year when the
geopolitical environment was becoming
more uncertain. In a time like now,
things have gotten absolutely crazy,
right? So, it's precisely this kind of
shock that a strategic petroleum reserve
is meant to protect against, right? So,
I keep an eye on what China decides when
it comes to that. Although, even then,
we are not knowledge, of course, that's
a very opaque conversation and it would
take a, you know, you have to keep your
ears really close to the ground to
figure out what's going on.